                                                AN ALGEBRAIC REDUCTION OF THE ‘SCALING GAP’ IN THE NAVIER-STOKES
                                                                     REGULARITY PROBLEM

                                                                   ZACHARY BRADSHAW, ASEEL FARHAT, AND ZORAN GRUJIĆ


                                                  A BSTRACT. It is shown–within a mathematical framework based on the suitably defined scale of




arXiv:1704.05546v4 [math.AP] 7 Sep 2018
                                                  sparseness of the super-level sets of the positive and negative parts of the vorticity components, and
                                                  in the context of a blow-up-type argument–that the ever-resisting ‘scaling gap’, i.e., the scaling dis-
                                                  tance between a regularity criterion and a corresponding a priori bound (shortly, a measure of the
                                                  super-criticality of the 3D Navier-Stokes regularity problem), can be reduced by an algebraic factor;
                                                  since (independent) fundamental works of Ladyzhenskaya, Prodi and Serrin as well as Kato and Fu-
                                                  jita in 1960s, all the reductions have been logarithmic in nature, regardless of the functional set up
                                                  utilized. More precisely, it is shown that it is possible to obtain an a priori bound that is algebraically
                                                  better than the energy-level bound, while keeping the corresponding regularity criterion at the same
                                                  level as all the classical regularity criteria. The mathematics presented was inspired by morphol-
                                                  ogy of the regions of intense vorticity/velocity gradients observed in computational simulations of
                                                  turbulent flows, as well as by the physics of turbulent cascades and turbulent dissipation.




                                                                                              1. P ROLOGUE

                                          The Navier-Stokes equations (NSE) describing the motion of three-dimensional (3D) incompress-
                                          ible, viscous, Newtonian fluids read


                                          (1)                                     ∂t u + (u · ∇)u = ν4u − ∇p + f,

                                          supplemented with the incompressibility condition ∇ · u = 0. Here, the vector field u represents
                                          the velocity, the scalar field p the pressure, a positive constant ν is the viscosity, and the vector
                                          field f an external force.

                                            Date: September 11, 2018.
                                                                                                      1
2                        ZACHARY BRADSHAW, ASEEL FARHAT, AND ZORAN GRUJIĆ


Henceforth, for simplicity of the exposition, ν will be normalized to 1, f taken to be zero, and the
spatial domain to be the whole space R3 (since this is an irreversible system, the temporal variable
lives in the interval (0, ∞)). In this setting, the only relevant piece of data is the initial velocity
configuration u0 .

Mathematical theory of the 3D NSE emerged from the groundbreaking work of Leray in the 1930s
[Leray1, Leray2, Leray3] in which he established global-in-time existence of weak solutions em-
anating from the initial data with arbitrary large energy, and charted the paths for the study of
local-in-time and global-in-time existence and uniqueness of strong solutions within the realms of
arbitrary large and appropriately small initial data, respectively.

A central problem in the theory ever since has been the possibility of singularity formation in the
system, and could be considered either from the point of view of possible singularity formation in
a weak solution or from the point of view of possible finite time blow-up of a local-in-time strong
solution. This problem is usually referred to as the Navier-Stokes regularity problem.

The Navier-Stokes regularity problem is supercritical, i.e., there is a ‘scaling gap’–with respect
to the unique scaling transformation realizing the scaling-invariance of the equations–between
any known regularity criterion and the corresponding a priori bound. (Note that if (u, p) is a
solution to the 3D NSE on R3 × (0, ∞), then for any λ > 0, the rescaled pair (uλ , pλ ) given by
uλ (x, t) = λu(λx, λ2 t) and pλ (x, t) = λ2 p(λx, λ2 t) is also a solution; in addition, this is the only
such transformation.)

If we focus on L∞ ((0, T ), X)-type spaces, perhaps the most illustrative example is in the Lp -scale
where the regularity class is L∞ ((0, T ), L3 ) ([ESS03]; for generalizations see [GKP, Phuc]), and the
corresponding a priori bound the Leray bound L∞ ((0, T ), L2 ). Moreover, since 1960s, the scaling
gap has been of the fixed ‘size’ in the sense that all the regularity classes are (at best) scaling-
invariant while–in contrast–all the known a priori bounds are on the scaling level of the Leray
bound.

Recall that arguably the most classical (scaling invariant) regularity criteria are the Ladyzhenskaya-
                                          2g
Prodi-Serrin conditions given by u ∈ L q−3 ((0, T ), Lq ), for 3 < q ≤ ∞, the other endpoint being the
aforementioned Escauriaza, Seregin, and Sverak class L∞ ((0, T ), L3 ). In the vorticity realm, this
designation goes to the Beale, Kato, and Majda (BKM)-criterion ([BKM84]), ω ∈ L1 ((0, T ), L∞ )
where ω is the vorticity of the fluid given by ω = curl u.

One might try to collect additional clues about possible singularity formation in the 3D NSE from
the geometry of turbulent flows. One of the most prominent morphological signatures of this
geometry–revealed in high-resolution computational simulations of high (and even moderate; see
[SchSree]) Reynolds number-flows– is spatial intermittency of the regions of intense vorticity and
velocity gradients.

In order to better understand geometry of the flow mathematically, it is beneficial to study the
vorticity-velocity formulation of the 3D NSE,


(2)                                ∂t ω + (u · ∇)ω = 4ω + (ω · ∇)u.
       AN ALGEBRAIC REDUCTION OF THE ‘SCALING GAP’ IN THE NAVIER-STOKES REGULARITY PROBLEM           3


The incompressibility implies that u can be reconstructed from ω by solving 4u = − curl ω,
leading to the Biot-Savart law, and closing the system.

Let us start by noting that conceivably a first work in mathematical analysis of the 3D NSE that
was motivated by geometry of the flow was a work by Giga and Miyakawa [GiMi] establishing
global-in-time existence of small, measure-valued solutions modeling the vortex filaments (the
space utilized is a scaling-invariant Morrey-Campanato space).

A conceptually related program aimed at mathematical modeling and analysis of coherent struc-
tures in fluid flows via the study of oscillating and localized solutions to the NSE was initiated
by Meyer and his students (Brandolese, Cannone, Lemarie-Rieusset, Planchon, ...); this brought
in an array of scale-sensitive harmonic analysis tools such as wavelets, atomic decomposition and
Littlewood-Paley analysis. A chapter in C.I.M.E. lecture notes by Meyer [Mey] provides an insight
into many of the main ideas and results related to this program.

The vortex-stretching term, (ω · ∇)u, is responsible for a possibly unbounded growth of the vor-
ticity magnitude in 3D; mechanically, the process of vortex stretching in conjunction with incom-
pressibility of the fluid and conservation of the angular momentum amplifies the vorticity, for-
mally, if we erase the vortex-stretching term in the equations, and the only nonlinear term left is
the advection term (u · ∇)ω, an a priori bound on the L2 -norm of the vorticity–which suffices to
bootstrap to infinite smoothness–follows in one line ((ω · ∇)u is identically zero in 2D).
However, some caution is advised in labeling the vortex-stretching term as a clear-cut ‘bad guy’.
While the process of vortex-stretching does amplify the vorticity, it also produces locally anisotropic
small scales in the flow (diameter of a vortex tube, thickness of a vortex sheet, etc.), and this gives
a chance to some form of a locally anisotropic diffusion to engage just on time to prevent the fur-
ther amplification of the vorticity magnitude and possible singularity formation. As a matter of
fact, Taylor [Tay37] concluded his paper from the 1930s with the following thought on turbulent
dissipation:

“It seems that the stretching of vortex filaments must be regarded as the principal mechanical
cause of the high rate of dissipation which is associated with turbulent motion.”

The stretching is also chiefly responsible for the phenomenon of local coherence of the vorticity
direction prominent in coherent vortex structures (e.g., in vortex tubes) which can be viewed as
a local manifestation of the quasi low-dimensionality of the regions of intense fluid activity. This
observation led to the rigorous mathematical study of locally anisotropic dissipation in the 3D
NSE originating in the pioneering work by Constantin [Co94] where he presented a singular inte-
gral representation of the stretching factor in the evolution of the vorticity magnitude, featuring a
geometric kernel depleted precisely by local coherence of the vorticity direction. This has been re-
ferred to as ‘geometric depletion of the nonlinearity’, and was a key in the proof of a fundamental
result by Constantin and Fefferman [CoFe93], stating that as long as the vorticity direction (in the
regions of intense vorticity) is Lipschitz-coherent, no finite time blow-up can occur.
The Lipschitz-coherence was later scaled down to 12 -Hölder [daVeigaBe02], followed up by a
complete spatiotemporal localization to an arbitrary small parabolic cylinder B(x0 , 2R) × (t0 −
(2R)2 , t0 ) [Gr09], and the construction of scaling-invariant, local, hybrid geometric-analytic regu-
larity classes in which the coherence of the vorticity direction is balanced against the growth of the
4                        ZACHARY BRADSHAW, ASEEL FARHAT, AND ZORAN GRUJIĆ


vorticity magnitude [GrGu10-1]. In particular, denoting the vorticity direction by ξ, the following
scaling-invariant regularity class is included,

                          Z t0            Z
                                                      |ω(x, t)|2 ρ21 ,2R (x, t) dx dt < ∞
                              t0 −(2R)2   B(x0 ,2R)               2



where

                                                                                   
                                                              sin ∠ ξ(x, t), ξ(y, t)
                              ργ,r (x, t) =       sup                                    ;
                                              y∈B(x,r),y6=x           |x − y|γ

this is to be contrasted to an a priori bound obtained in [Co90],

                         Z TZ                                              Z
                                                                       1
                                      |ω(x, t)||∇ξ(x, t)|2 dx dt ≤              |u0 (x)|2 dx,
                          0      R3                                    2   R3

which exhibits the same scaling as the Leray class L∞ ((0, T ), L2 ); another manifestation of the
scaling gap.

Let us return to the spatial intermittency of the regions of intense vorticity, more specifically, to
‘sparseness’ of the vorticity super-level sets. This type of morphology motivated a recent work
[Gr13] where it was shown that as long as the vorticity super-level sets, cut at a fraction of the
L∞ -norm, exhibit a suitably defined property of sparseness at the scale comparable to the radius
of spatial analyticity measured in L∞ , no finite time blow-up can occur. (The proof was presented
for the velocity formulation, and the argument for the vorticity formulation is completely analo-
gous.)
The concept of sparseness needed in the proof is essentially local existence of a sparse direction
(the direction is allowed to depend on the point) at the scale of interest, and it will be referred to as
‘1D sparseness’. The precise definitions of 1D sparseness and a related concept of ‘3D sparseness’
can be found at the beginning of section 3, as well as a remark on their relationship. In the rest of
this section, sparseness will refer to 3D sparseness; we copy the definition below for convenience
of the reader (m3 denotes the 3-dimensional Lebesgue measure).
Let S be an open subset of R3 , δ ∈ (0, 1), x0 a point in R3 , and r ∈ (0, ∞). S is 3D δ-sparse around
x0 at scale r if


                                              m3 S ∩ B(x0 , r)
                                                              
                                                             ≤ δ.
                                               m3 B(x0 , r)

Since we are interested in the super-level sets of a vector field cut at a fraction of the L∞ -norm, at
the scale comparable to some inverse power of the L∞ -norm, there are several parameters floating
around: the fraction at which we cut (call it λ), the ratio of sparseness δ and a constant multiplying
the inverse power of the L∞ -norm (call it 1c ). More precisely, the class of functions of interest, Xα ,
is defined as follows.
       AN ALGEBRAIC REDUCTION OF THE ‘SCALING GAP’ IN THE NAVIER-STOKES REGULARITY PROBLEM             5


Definition 1. For a positive exponent α, and a selection of parameters λ in (0, 1), δ in (0, 1) and
c0 > 1, the class of functions Xα (λ, δ; c0 ) consists of bounded, continuous functions f : R3 → R3
subjected to the requirement that the super-level set

                                                                    
                                               3
(3)                                       x ∈ R : |f (x)| > λkf k∞


is δ-sparse around any point x0 at scale 1c kf1kα , for some c, c10 ≤ c ≤ c0 .
                                                   ∞


It is instructive to make a brief comparison of the scale of classes Xα with the scale of Lorentz
Lp,∞ spaces defined by the requirement that the distribution function of f , the Lebesgue measure
of the super-level set cut at level β, decays at least as the inverse p-power of β. There are two key
differences:
(i) the definition of Xα involves a specific type of the super-level sets, cut at a fraction of the L∞ -
norm, while the definition of Lp,∞ involves all levels β,
(ii) the Lp,∞ spaces are blind to any geometric properties of the super-level sets, and measure only
the rate of decay of the volume, while the classes Xα can detect the scale of sparseness of the
super-level sets of the highest interest.
Remark 2. It is worth noting that the same phenomenon will occur in all rearrangement-invariant
(with respect to the Lebesgue measure) function classes, i.e., the classes that do not differentiate
between the functions having identical distribution functions. Typical examples are Lebesgue
classes Lp , general Lorentz classes Lp,q and Orlicz classes Lφ .

Taking a closer look, on one hand, it is plain that

                                                                         p
(4)                                f ∈ Lp,∞ =⇒ f ∈ Xα for α =
                                                                         3
(for a given selection of λ and δ, the tolerance parameter c0 will depend on the Lp,∞ -norm of f ),
on the other hand, in the geometrically worst case scenario (from the point of view of sparseness),
the whole super-level set being clumped into a single ball, being in Xα is consistent with being in
L3α,∞ .
This provides a simple ‘conversion rule’ between the two scales, α = p3 , determining the scaling
signature of the classes Xα .
Let us decode the scaling distance between the regularity criterion established in [Gr13] (in the
vorticity formulation), and any corresponding a priori bounds.
Recall that the scale of sparseness required is comparable to the lower bound on the radius of
spatial analyticity evaluated at a suitable time t prior to (possible) blow-up, namely, 1c 1 1 , i.e.,
                                                                                                 2
                                                                                           kω(t)k∞
one needs ω in X 1 .
                   2

In contrast, the best a priori bound available is ω in X 1 ; this follows simply from the a priori
                                                               3
bound on the L1 -norm of the vorticity ([Co90]) and Chebyshev’s inequality (an L log L-bound
6                          ZACHARY BRADSHAW, ASEEL FARHAT, AND ZORAN GRUJIĆ


on the vorticity is available under a very weak assumption that the vorticity direction is in a local,
logarithmically-weighted BM O space that allows for discontinuities [BrGr13-2]).
                                                                    3
Applying the scaling conversion rule, X 1 corresponds to L 2 ,∞ and X 1 to L1,∞ ; since these are pre-
                                         2                              3
cisely the endpoint classes within the Lp,∞ -scale in the vorticity formulation, we arrive at yet an-
other manifestation of the scaling gap (also, not surprising as the derivation of the a priori bound,
ω in X 1 , uses no geometric tools).
       3


Back to the drawing board. Recall that computational simulations of turbulent flows indicate a
high degree of local anisotropy present in the vorticity field, manifested through the formation of
various coherent vortex structures (e.g., vortex sheets and vortex tubes).
A simple but key observation is that a vector field exhibiting a high degree of local anisotropy is
more likely to allow for a considerable discrepancy in sparseness between the full vectorial super-
level sets and the super-level sets of the components. As a matter of fact, it is easy to construct
locally anisotropic smooth vector fields for which the former are not sparse at any scale, while the
latter can feature any predetermined scale of sparseness.
This is our primary motivation for replacing the scale of classes Xα by the scale of classes Zα
based on sparseness of the super-level sets of the locally selected positive and negative parts of
the vectorial components fi , fi± , for i = 1, 2, 3.
Definition 3. For a positive exponent α, and a selection of parameters λ in (0, 1), δ in (0, 1) and
c0 > 1, the class of functions Zα (λ, δ; c0 ) consists of bounded, continuous functions f : R3 →
R3 subjected to the following local condition. For x0 in R3 , select the/a component fi± such
that fi± (x0 ) = |f (x0 )| (henceforth, the norm of a vector v = (a, b, c), |v|, will be computed as
max{|a|, |b|, |c|}), and require that the set

                                                                         
                                           x∈R   3
                                                     : fi± (x) > λkf k∞

is δ-sparse around x0 at scale 1c kf1kα , for some c, c10 ≤ c ≤ c0 . Enforce this for all x0 in R3 .
                                      ∞

Remark 4. Shortly, we require (local) sparseness of the/a locally maximal component only.

(The scaling conversion rule remains the same, α = p3 .)
Going back to the vorticity, since this is potentially a much weaker condition, the two questions to
examine are as follows.
(a) is it possible to obtain an analogous regularity criterion at the same scale of sparseness (com-
pared to the full vectorial super-level sets), or at all?
(b) is it possible to establish an a priori bound at a smaller scale of sparseness (compared to the
full vectorial case), in particular, in the sense of modifying the scaling exponent α by an algebraic
factor?

Affirmative answers to (a) and (b) are presented in sections 3 (Theorem 19) and 4 (Theorem 26),
respectively, yielding a regularity criterion in Z 1 and an priori bound in Z 2 (with the identical
                                                   2                          5
selection of the parameters λ, δ and c0 ); since
       AN ALGEBRAIC REDUCTION OF THE ‘SCALING GAP’ IN THE NAVIER-STOKES REGULARITY PROBLEM             7



  Regularity class                     A priori bound                       Energy class


  u ∈ L∞ (0, T ; L3 )                  u ∈ L∞ (0, T ; L2 )                  u ∈ L∞ (0, T ; L2 )


                   3
  ω ∈ L∞ (0, T ; L 2 )                 ω ∈ L∞ (0, T ; L1 )                  ω ∈ L∞ (0, T ; L1 )


  ω(τ ) ∈ X 1 for a particular τ < T   ω(τ ) ∈ X 1 a.e. τ < T               ω(τ ) ∈ X 1 a.e. τ < T
            2                                    3                                    3




  ω(τ ) ∈ Z 1 for a particular τ < T   ω(τ ) ∈ Z 2 for τ < T whenever ω(τ ) ∈ Z 1 a.e. τ < T
            2                                    5                              3
                                       kω(τ )k∞ is large enough


       TABLE 1. The scaling distance between regularity and energy classes is consistent
       across the table. Generally, a priori bounded quantities are in the energy class. Re-
       markably, Theorem 26 shows the a priori bound in the Zα class is algebraically better
       than the energy class (the a priori bound in Zα is derived in the context of a blow-up
       argument).



                                              1  2 1
                                                < < ,
                                              3  5 2
this represents an algebraic reduction of the scaling gap in the Zα -framework.

For a quick scaling comparison, several pointwise-in-time classes and their respective bounds are
listed in Table 1.
Remark 5. Note that in the geometrically worst case scenario (for sparseness), ω being in Z 2 is con-
                                                                                                  5
                          6                                                     6
sistent with ω being in L 5 ,∞ which is–in turn–at the same scaling level as L 5 . Hence, a ‘geometri-
                                                                                                     6
cally blind’ scaling counterpart of our a priori bound in Z 2 would be the bound ω in L∞ ((0, T ), L 5 )
                                                             5
which is well beyond state-of-the-art (ω in L∞ ((0, T ), L1 ) [Co90]). A counterpart in the velocity
                                            12
realm would be the bound u in L∞ ((0, T ), L 5 ), also well beyond state-of-the-art (this would rep-
resent an algebraic improvement of the Leray bound u in L∞ ((0, T ), L2 )).
Remark 6. One should remark that this is not the first time that the exponent 52 appeared in the
study of formation of small scales in turbulent flows. In the context of the 3D inviscid dynamics,
the BKM-type criteria reveal that the formation of infinite spatial gradients/infinitesimally-small
spatial scales is necessary for a finite time blow-up. In particular (see a discussion in [Co94]), if we
consider the case of approximately self-similar blow-up for the 3D Euler in the form
                                                               
                                                    1       x
                                        ω(x, t) ≈      Ω          ,
                                                  T −t     L(t)
8                         ZACHARY BRADSHAW, ASEEL FARHAT, AND ZORAN GRUJIĆ


then the relevant BKM-type necessary condition for the blow-up reads
                                    Z T
                                             − 5
                                        L(t) 2 dt = ∞,
                                           0
and if we focus on the algebraic-type dependence,
                                                             t p
                                           L(t) = L(0) 1 −         ,
                                                              T
then the blow-up can be sustained only when p ≥ 52 . Furthermore, since by dimensional analysis
ω ≈ T 1−t , this scaling is fully consistent with the vorticity being in Z 2 near a possible singular time
                                                                           5
T , strongly hinting at the inviscid nature of Z 2 .
                                                 5

Remark 7. It is not inconceivable that–at least partially–the discrepancy between the exponents 25
and 31 can be viewed as an indirect measure of the degree of local anisotropy of the vorticity field
in the regions of intense fluid activity. It is worth noting that the same line of arguments, applied
to the velocity itself, does not yield any reduction of the scaling gap ([FGL]); this is consistent with
the picture painted by computational simulations (and fluid mechanics) in which the regions of
high velocity magnitude tend to be more isotropic (recall that in a suitable statistical sense, the K41
turbulence phenomenology–based on the velocity–is isotropic and homogeneous, while one way
to rationalize the phenomenon of intermittency in turbulence is precisely via the coherent vortex
structures).



               2. L OCAL - IN - TIME SPATIAL ANALYTICITY OF THE VORTICITY IN L∞

One of the most compelling manifestations of diffusion in the 3D NSE is the instantaneous spatially-
analytic smoothing of the rough initial data. An explicit, sharp lower bound on the radius of
(spatial) analyticity of the solution emanating from an initial datum in Lp , for 3 < p < ∞, was
given in [GrKu98]; the method–inspired by the so-called Gevrey class-method introduced by Foias
and Temam in [FT]–was based on complexifying the equations and tracking the boundary of the
(locally-in-time expanding) domain of analyticity via solving a real system of PDEs satisfied by
the real and the imaginary parts of the complexified solutions.
Since the Riesz transforms are not bounded on L∞ , to obtain an estimate in the case p = ∞ without
a logarithmic correction requires a different argument (on the real level), see, e.g., [GIM, Ku2]
and [Gu] in the real and the complex setting, respectively, in the realm of the velocity-pressure
formulation of the 3D NSE.
The L∞ -argument within the vorticity-velocity description requires a modification, and we present
a sketch here, including an estimate on the vortex-stretching term, for completeness. What fol-
lows is a modification of the exposition given in [Ku2]. In addition to the initial vorticity ω0 being
bounded, a suitable decay of ω0 at infinity will be required (we chose ω0 in L2 for convenience);
however, it is worth noting that this is a ‘soft assumption’, i.e., there will be no quantitative de-
pendence on kω0 k2 in the proof.

Theorem 8 (real setting). Let the initial datum ω0 be in L2 ∩L∞ . Then there exists a unique mild solution
ω in Cw [0, T ], L∞ where T ≥ 1c kω01k∞ for an absolute constant c > 0.
                   
       AN ALGEBRAIC REDUCTION OF THE ‘SCALING GAP’ IN THE NAVIER-STOKES REGULARITY PROBLEM           9


Remark 9. Since L∞ is not separable, the continuity of the heat semigroup at the initial time is guar-
                                                                                ∞
                                                                                  
anteed only in the weak sense; hence the appearance of the space Cw [0, T ], L      in the statement
of the theorem. Alternatively, one could replace L∞ with its (closed) subspace of the uniformly
continuous functions, and have the strong continuity at the initial time.

Sketch of the proof.   The vorticity-velocity formulation of the 3D NSE in the components is as
follows,


(5)                           ∂t ωj − 4ωj + ui ∂i ωj = ωi ∂i uj , j = 1, 2, 3

where u can be recovered from ω by the Biot-Savart law,

                                               Z
                                                                     1
                               uj (x, t) = c        j,k,l ∂yk            ωl (y, t) dy
                                                                  |x − y|

(j,k,l is the Levi-Civita symbol), making this a closed system for ω. Differentiation yields


                                                                  ∂2
                                                   Z
                                                                           1
(6)                       ∂i uj (x, t) = c P.V.        j,k,l                   ωl (y, t) dy.
                                                                ∂xi ∂yk |x − y|

A key observation is that the kernel

                                                     ∂2       1
                                                   ∂xi ∂yk |x − y|

is a classical Calderon-Zygmund kernel; hence,


(7)                                k∇u(·, t)kBM O ≤ c kω(·, t)kBM O .

Since we are interested in the mild solutions, we rewrite the equations (5) via the action of the heat
semigroup,

                                        Z
                          ωj (x, t) =   G(x − y, t)(ω0 )j (y) dy
                                     Z tZ
                                   −      G(x − y, t − s) ui ∂i ωj (y, s) dy ds
                                      0
                                     Z tZ
(8)                                +      G(x − y, t − s) ωi ∂j uj (y, s) dy ds,
                                        0

where G is the heat kernel.

Similarly as in the velocity-pressure description (see, e.g., [GrKu98]), the estimates are performed
on the sequence of smooth (entire in the spatial variable) global-in-time approximations.
10                        ZACHARY BRADSHAW, ASEEL FARHAT, AND ZORAN GRUJIĆ


                                   Z
                      (n)
                     ωj (x, t) =    G(x − y, t)(ω0 )j (y) dy
                                 Z tZ
                                                          (n−1)     (n−1)
                               −      G(x − y, t − s) ui        ∂i ωj     (y, s) dy ds
                                  0
                                 Z tZ
                                                          (n−1)     (n−1)
(9)                            +      G(x − y, t − s) ωi        ∂j uj     (y, s) dy ds,
                                     0

supplemented with
                                                     Z
                              (n)                                        1    (n)
                             uj (x, t) = c               j,k,l ∂yk          ω (y, t) dy.
                                                                      |x − y| l

The goal is to keep ω (n) in L∞ and ∇u(n) in BM O (uniformly in n, locally-in-time), analogously
to keeping u(n) in L∞ and p(n) in BM O in the velocity-pressure formulation.
                                                                                (n−1)        (n−1)
We present an estimate on the vortex-stretching term ωi       ∂j uj  , the term responsible for a
potentially unrestricted growth of the vorticity magnitude, in some detail.

An estimate on the vortex-stretching term.
                                                                                                                   √
                                                                                                                  t
The main ingredients are: a pointwise estimate on the heat kernel G, G(x, t) ≤ c                                  √ 4 (see,
                                                                                                              |x|+ t
e.g., [LR]), a property of a scalar-valued BM O function f featuring a suitable decay at infinity
(e.g., being in the closure of the test functions in the uniformly-local Lp for some p, 1 ≤ p < ∞),
R |f (x)|
   (|x|+1)4
            dx ≤ c kf kBM O (in general, one has to subtract a local average, for example, over a unit
                                                                    1
                                                                      R
                                                        R |f (x)− |B|   B f|
ball B, in which case the inequality takes the form            (|x|+1)4
                                                                             dx ≤ c kf kBM O [St]), and the
Calderon-Zygmund relation (6).

Combining the above ingredients implies the following string of inequalities.

             Z tZ
                                           (n)              (n)
                    G(x − y,t − s) ωi (y, s) ∂i uj (y, s) dy ds
               0
                                                               Z tZ                   √
                                                 (n)                                   t−s             (n)
                              ≤ sup kω                 (s)k∞                            √      4 |∂i uj | dy ds
                                s∈(0,t)                           0            |x − y| + t − s
                                                               Z tZ
                                                                                  1             (n)
                              ≤ sup kω (n) (s)k∞                                         4 |∂i uj | dz ds
                                s∈(0,t)                           0            |z| + 1
                                                                                      (n)
                              ≤ c t sup kω (n) (s)k∞ sup k∂i uj (s)kBM O
                                       s∈(0,t)                        s∈(0,t)

                              ≤ c t sup kω (n) (s)k∞ sup kω (n) (s)kBM O
                                       s∈(0,t)                        s∈(0,t)
                                                                     2
(10)                          ≤ ct          sup kω (n) (s)k∞               .
                                           s∈(0,t)
       AN ALGEBRAIC REDUCTION OF THE ‘SCALING GAP’ IN THE NAVIER-STOKES REGULARITY PROBLEM                  11

                             (n)
(Since ω (n) (s) is in L2 , ∂i uj (s) is in L2 as well (by Calderon-Zygmund), and the first BM O-bound
is available.)

The estimate on the advection term can be absorbed in the above bound, and we arrive at

                                                                                       2
                        sup kω (n+1) (s)k∞ ≤ c kω0 k∞ + c t          sup kω (n) (s)k∞        ,
                       s∈(0,t)                                      s∈(0,t)

which yields boundedness of the sequence on the time-interval    of the desired length. A similar
argument implies the contraction property in Cw [0, T ], L∞ , concluding the proof.
                                                           


The complexification argument is analogous to the complexification of the velocity-pressure for-
mulation; for details, see [GrKu98].
The main idea is as follows. Recall that the functions in the sequence of approximations (ω (n) , u(n) )
are entire functions in the spatial variable for any t > 0. Then, denoting a point in C3 by x + iy,
introduce a related sequence (Ω(n) , U (n) ) by


                    Ω(n) (x, t) = ω (n) (x + iαt, t) and U (n) (x, t) = u(n) (x + iαt, t)

where α > 0 is an optimization parameter.

The real and the imaginary parts of each of the elements in the sequence (Ω(n) , U (n) ) satisfy a real
system in which the principal linear parts are decoupled, and the only new type of terms generated
by the complexification procedure are two lower-order (first order) linear terms coming from the
chain rule and the Cauchy-Riemann equations in C3 .

Local-in-time estimates on the system are then of the same type as the estimates on the real 3D
NSE, resulting in √expansion of the domain of analyticity–after the optimization in the parameter
α–comparable to t (the only global-in-time property needed is for the real and imaginary parts
of each Ω(n) , on each real-space ‘slice’, to be in L2 ; this is, as in the real case, guaranteed by the
assumption that ω0 in L2 ).
More precisely, we arrive at the following result.

Theorem 10 (complex setting). Let the initial datum ω0 be in L2 ∩ L∞ , and M a constant largerthan 1.
Then there is a constant c(M ) > 1 such that there exists a unique mild solution ω in Cw [0, T ], L∞ where
        1     1                                                      3
T ≥ c(M   ) kω0 k∞ , and for any t in (0, T ] the solution ω is the R -restriction of a holomorphic function ω
defined in the domain

                                                                              √
                                                                                  
                                                       3             1
                                   Ωt =       x + iy ∈ C : |y| < p                t ;
                                                                  c(M )
moreover, kω(t)kL∞ (Ωt ) ≤ M kω0 k∞ .
Remark 11. The above theorem can be localized in the spirit of [BGK15]; this would provide a
(local) lower bound on the radius of spatial analyticity in terms of the local quantities only (at the
expense of a logarithmic correction).
12                       ZACHARY BRADSHAW, ASEEL FARHAT, AND ZORAN GRUJIĆ


       3. S PATIAL COMPLEXITY OF THE VORTICITY COMPONENTS : A REGULARITY CRITERION

Henceforth, mn will denote the n-dimensional Lebesgue measure. Let us start with recalling the
concepts of 1D and 3D sparseness suitable for our purposes ([Gr13, FGL]).

Let S be an open subset of R3 , δ ∈ (0, 1), x0 a point in R3 , and r ∈ (0, ∞).

Definition 12. S is 1D δ-sparse around x0 at scale r if there exists a unit vector d in S 2 such that
                                  m1 S ∩ (x0 − rd, x0 + rd)
                                                               
                                                                 ≤ δ.
                                               2r

Definition 13. S is 3D δ-sparse around x0 at scale r if
                                        m3 S ∩ B(x0 , r)
                                                        
                                                       ≤ δ.
                                         m3 B(x0 , r)

Remark 14. On one hand, it is straightforward to check that, for any S, 3D δ-sparseness at scale r
                1
implies 1D (δ) 3 -sparseness at scale ρ, for some ρ in (0, r], at any given pair (x0 , r). On the other
hand, there are plenty of simple examples in which any attempt at the converse fails. However, if
one is interested in sparseness of a set at scale r, uniformly in x0 (as we will be), the difference is
much less pronounced.

We will formulate      our regularity criterion as a no-blow-up criterion for a solution ω belonging to
C [0, T ), L where T ∗ is the first (possible) blow-up time. In this setting, it is convenient to have
          ∗    ∞
                 
the notion of an ‘escape time’.

Definition 15. Let ω be in C [0, T ∗ ), L∞ where T ∗ is the first possible blow-up time. A time t in
                                              

(0, T ∗ ) is an escape time if kω(τ )k∞ > kω(t)k∞ for any τ in (t, T ∗ ).
Remark 16. It is a well-known fact that for any level L > 0, there exists a unique escape time t(L);
this follows from the local-in-time well-posedness in a straightforward manner. As a consequence,
there are continuum many escape times in (0, T ∗ ).

As in the previous section, we assume that the initial datum ω0 is (in addition) in L2 .
Then we can solve the 3D NSE locally-in-time, at any t in (0, T ∗ ), and uniqueness in conjunction
with Theorem 10 will yield a lower bound on the radius of spatial analyticity near t. In particular,
for an escape time t, we consider a temporal point s = s(t) conforming to the requirement

                                                                      
                                             1                  1
(11)                       s in t +                  ,t +                ;
                                       4c(M )kω(t)k∞      c(M )kω(t)k∞

then, a lower bound on the radius of spatial analyticity at s is given by

                                                   1
                                                          1   .
                                                        2
                                            2c(M )kω(t)k∞
       AN ALGEBRAIC REDUCTION OF THE ‘SCALING GAP’ IN THE NAVIER-STOKES REGULARITY PROBLEM             13


Moreover, since t is an escape time, this lower bound can be replaced by

                                                       1
                                                              1    ,
                                                             2
                                                 2c(M )kω(s)k∞

i.e., in this situation there is no need to worry about a time-lag–a lower bound on the analyticity
radius at s is given in terms of the L∞ -norm of the solution at s.

The property of 1D sparseness will be assumed on the super-level sets of the positive and negative
parts of the vorticity components ωj at s (recall that for a scalar-valued function f , the positive and
negative parts of f are given by f + (x) = max (f (x), 0) and f − (x) = − min (f (x), 0), respectively);
more precisely, the sets of interests will be the sets Vsj,± defined by

                                                                               
                                                                    1
(12)                         Vsj,± =       x ∈ R3 : ωj± (x, s) >      kω(s)k∞
                                                                   2M

(M is as in Theorem 10).




Since the proof of our regularity criterion is based on the harmonic measure maximum principle,
we recall a version suitable for our purposes. Here, as in [Gr13], we are concerned with the har-
monic measure in the complex plane C; for a suitable pair of sets Ω, K , the harmonic measure of
K with respect to Ω, evaluated at a point z, will be denoted by h(z, Ω, K). (For the basic properties
of the harmonic measure in this setting, see, e.g., [Ahl, Ran].)
Proposition 17. [Ran] Let Ω be an open, connected set in C such that its boundary has nonzero Hausdorff
dimension, and let K be a Borel subset of the boundary. Suppose that u is a subharmonic function on Ω
satisfying
                                                 u(z) ≤ M, for z ∈ Ω
                                       lim sup u(z) ≤ m, for ζ ∈ K.
                                           z→ζ

Then
                                                              
                        u(z) ≤ m h(z, Ω, K) + M 1 − h(z, Ω, K) for z ∈ Ω.

The last ingredient needed is an extremal property of the harmonic measure in the unit disk
D.

Proposition 18. [Sol] Let λ be in (0, 1), K a closed subset of [−1, 1] such that m1 (K) = 2λ, and suppose
that the origin is in D \ K. Then
                                                            2        1 − (1 − λ)2
                           h(0, D, K) ≥ h(0, D, Kλ ) =        arcsin
                                                            π        1 + (1 − λ)2
where Kλ = [−1, −1 + λ] ∪ [1 − λ, 1].
14                        ZACHARY BRADSHAW, ASEEL FARHAT, AND ZORAN GRUJIĆ




        F IGURE 1. The blue and the red regions are precisely the sets V 1,± , i.e., the super-
        level sets of the positive and the negative parts of ω1 , to be contrasted to the totality of
        the region visualized which corresponds to the super-level set of the the full vectorial
        norm max{|ω1 |, |ω2 |, |ω3 |} (from a snapshot of a simulation initialized with the low fre-
        quency noise-type initial data at the Reynolds number of approximately 104 ; courtesy of
        M. Mizstal, NBI).


At this point, it is beneficial to set a specific set of constants: let M be the solution to the equation
                                                         2
1 ∗         ∗                                    1−( 34 ) 3
2 h + (1 − h )M     = 1 where h∗ = π2 arcsin             2    , and let c(M ) be as in Theorem 10 (note that
                                                 1+( 34 ) 3
1 < M < 23 ).

Theorem 19. Let ω be in C [0, T ∗ ), L∞ where T ∗ is the first possible
                                            
                                                                             blow-up time, and assume, in
addition, that ω0 is in L2 (then, ω is automatically in L∞ (0, T − ), L2 for any 0 < T − < T ∗ ).
                                                                        


Let t be an escape time, and suppose that there exists a temporal point s = s(t) as in (11) such that for any
                                                         1
spatial point x0 , there exists a scale ρ, 0 < ρ ≤           1 and a direction d with the property that the
                                                              2
                                                  2c(M )kω(s)k∞
        AN ALGEBRAIC REDUCTION OF THE ‘SCALING GAP’ IN THE NAVIER-STOKES REGULARITY PROBLEM                        15

                                                    1
super-level set Vsj,± delineated in (12) is 1D ( 34 ) 3 -sparse around x0 at scale ρ; here, the pair (j, ±) is chosen
according to the following selection criterion: |ω(x0 , s)| = ωj± (x0 , s).

Then T ∗ is not a blow-up time.

Remark 20. Notice that–as far as the temporal intermittency goes–it is enough that the condition on
local 1D sparseness holds at some s(t) for a single escape time t (recall that there are continuum-
many escape times; in particular, there are continuum-many escape times in any interval of the
form (T ∗ − , T ∗ )).


Proof. (The argument to be presented is a refinement of the argument introduced in [Gr13].)
Let t be an escape time and s = s(t) satisfy the condition (11). The idea is to show that


(13)                                          kω(s)k∞ ≤ kω(t)k∞

utilizing the sparseness at s via the harmonic measure maximum principle; this would contradict
the assumption that t is an escape and in turn the assumption that T ∗ is the first possible blow-up
time.

Fix a spatial point x0 and let d be the direction of 1D sparseness around x0 postulated in the the-
orem. Since the 3D NSE are translationally and rotationally invariant, and the coordinate trans-
formations would change neither the lower bound on the analyticity radius nor the L∞ -bound on
the complexified solution (nor the sparseness), without loss of generality, assume that x0 = 0 and
d = (1, 0, 0). (The argument is completely local, i.e., we are considering one spatial point x0 at the
time.)

Let us focus on the complexification of the real coordinate x1 (regarding the other two variables as
parameters), and view ω(s) as an analytic, C3 -valued function on the symmetric strip around the
x1 -axis of the width of at least


                                                         1
                                                                1   .
                                                            2
                                                 c(M )kω(s)k∞
Since ω is analytic, the real and the imaginary parts of the component functions ωj are harmonic,
and their positive and negative parts subharmonic in the strip; in particular, the assumption on
the scale of sparseness ρ implies that they are subharmonic in the open disc


                                            Dρ = {z ∈ C : |z| < ρ}.

Select a pair (j, ±) such that |ω(0, s)| = ωj± (0, s). By the premise, the corresponding set Vsj,± is 1D
    1
( 43 ) 3 -sparse around 0 at scale ρ (in the direction e1 ).

Define a set K by
16                       ZACHARY BRADSHAW, ASEEL FARHAT, AND ZORAN GRUJIĆ




                                          K = Vsj,± ∩ (−ρ, ρ)

                                                                                   1
(the complement is taken within the interval [−ρ, ρ]), and note that m1 (K) ≥ 2ρ 43 2 .

There are two disjoint scenarios to consider. In the first one, 0 is in K. Then,


                                                      1          1
                          |ω(0, s)| = ωj± (0, s) ≤      kω(s)k∞ ≤ kω(t)k∞ ;
                                                     2M          2

i.e., the contribution of this particular x0 is consistent with (13), and we can move on. In the
second scenario, we can estimate the harmonic measure of K with respect to Dρ at 0 utilizing the
sparseness in conjunction with Proposition 18.

Recall that the harmonic measure is invariant with respect to any conformal map, and in particular
with respect to the scaling map φ(z) = ρ1 z; hence, Proposition 18 yields


                                                                    2
                                             2       1 − ( 43 ) 3
                               h(0, Dρ , K) ≥ arcsin              = h∗ .
                                             π             3 23
                                                     1+( )      4

The harmonic measure maximum principle (Proposition 17) applied to the subharmonic function
ωj± then implies the following bound:


                                                                           
                    1                                        1 ∗
     ωj± (0, s) ≤ h∗ kω(t)k∞ + (1 − h∗ ) M kω(t)k∞ =                     ∗
                                                               h + (1 − h )M kω(t)k∞ = kω(t)k∞ ;
                   2                                         2

the estimate on ωj± on the complement of K (within Dρ ) comes from the estimate on the complex-
ified solution in Theorem 10, and the last equality from our choice of the parameters.

Consequently, the second scenario is also compatible with the inequality (13).

Since the point x0 was an arbitrary point in R3 , this concludes the proof.
                                                                                                    
Remark 21. Note that the argument utilizing the sparseness via the harmonic measure maximum
principle per se is completely local. It is the application of Theorem 10 that ascribes to Theorem 19
the uniformly local nature. To arrive to a completely local result, it suffices to localize the result
presented in Theorem 10; c.f., Remark 11.
       AN ALGEBRAIC REDUCTION OF THE ‘SCALING GAP’ IN THE NAVIER-STOKES REGULARITY PROBLEM             17


        4. S PATIAL COMPLEXITY OF THE VORTICITY COMPONENTS : AN A PRIORI BOUND

Concepts of a set being r-mixed (or ‘mixed to scale r’) and r-semi-mixed appear in the study
of mixing properties of incompressible (or nearly incompressible) flows, and in particular in the
study of the optimal mixing strategies for passive scalars (e.g., density of a tracer) advected by an
incompressible velocity field (see, e.g., [Br] and [IKX]).

Definition 22. Let r > 0. An open set S is r-semi-mixed if there exists δ in (0, 1) such that
                                         m3 (S ∩ B(x, r))
                                                          ≤δ
                                          m3 (B(x, r))
for every x in R3 . If the complement of S is r-semi-mixed as well, then S is said to be r-mixed.

Remark 23. Recalling the definitions from the previous section, note that if the set S is r-semi-mixed
(with the ratio δ), then it is 3D δ-sparse around every point x0 in R3 at scale r.

The following lemma is a vector-valued version of a positive scalar-valued lemma in [IKX] where
the application was to the density of a tracer; a vectorial Besov space version was given in [FGL]
                        −1 -regularity criterion on the velocity. We present a detailed proof for
in the context of the B∞,∞
completeness of the exposition.

Lemma 24. Let r ∈ (0, 1] and f a bounded, continuous vector-valued function on R3 . Then, for any pair
                              1
(λ, δ), λ in (0, 1) and δ in 1+λ , 1 , there exists a constant c∗ (λ, δ) > 0 such that if

                                                            5
                                          kf kH −1 ≤ c∗ (λ, δ) r 2 kf k∞

then each of the six super-level sets Sλi,± = x ∈ R3 : fi± (x) > λkf k∞ is r-semi-mixed with the ratio δ.
                                              

(H −1 denotes the dual of the Sobolev space H 1 .)

Remark 25. It is worth noting that there could be a significant discrepancy between semi-mixedness
of the full vectorial super-level sets and the super-level sets of the components. As a matter of fact,
the former may not be semi-mixed at all, while the latter may be r-semi-mixed at any predeter-
mined scale. In particular, a duality argument of the type utilized in the lemma does not seem to
lead to any quantifiable semi-mixedness of the full vectorial super-level sets.


Proof. Assume the opposite, i.e., there exists an index i such that either Sλi,+ or Sλi,− is not r-semi-
mixed with the ratio δ. Suppose that it is Sλi,+ (if it were Sλi,− , the only modification would be to
replace the function φ below with −φ).

Consequently, there exists a spatial point x0 such that


                                    m3 (Sλi,+ ∩ B(x0 , r)) > δ V3 r3 ,

where V3 denotes the volume of the unit ball in R3 .
18                            ZACHARY BRADSHAW, ASEEL FARHAT, AND ZORAN GRUJIĆ


Let φ be an H 1 -optimal, smooth radial (monotone) function, equal to 1 in B(x0 , r), and vanishing
outside B(x0 , (1 + η)r) for some η > 0 (the value to be determined). Then, by duality,

                                                                 Z
                                                     1
(14)                                    kf kH −1 ≥                       fi (x)φ(x) dx .
                                                   kφkH 1           R3


An explicit calculation of the H 1 -norm of φ yields

                                                                            1
(15)                                                  kφkH 1 ≤ c(η) r 2

for a suitable c(η) > 0 (recall that r is in (0, 1]).

The objective is to obtain a lower bound on the numerator by performing a suitable domain-
decomposition of the integral.

                          Z                            Z
                               fi (x)φ(x) dx ≥               fi (x)φ(x) dx ≥ I − |II| − |III| ,
                          R3                            R3

where
                                                 Z
                                           I=                        fi (x)φ(x) dx,
                                                  Sλi,+ ∩B(x0 ,r)
                                                  Z
                                           II =                        fi (x)φ(x) dx
                                                      B(x0 ,r)\Sλi,+

and
                                            Z
                                   III =                                    fi (x)φ(x) dx.
                                                B(x0 ,(1+η)r)\B(x0 ,r)


It is transparent that

                                   Z                                   Z
                              I=                      fi (x) dx =                          fi+ (x) dx
                                    Sλi,+ ∩B(x0 ,r)                      Sλi,+ ∩B(x0 ,r)

(16)                            > λ kf k∞ m3 (Sλi,+ ∩ B(x0 , r)) ≥ λ δ V3 r3 kf k∞ ,


                      Z                                                                          
             |II| =                     fi (x) , dx ≤ kf k∞ m3 (B(x0 , r) − m3 (Sλi,+ ∩ B(x0 , r))
                       B(x0 ,r)\Sλi,+

                 ≤ kf k∞ V3 r3 − δ V3 r3
                                                  

(17)             = (1 − δ) V3 r3 kf k∞
       AN ALGEBRAIC REDUCTION OF THE ‘SCALING GAP’ IN THE NAVIER-STOKES REGULARITY PROBLEM                  19


and


                                    Z
                          |III| ≤                                fi (x) dx
                                     (B(x0 ,(1+η)r)\B(x0 ,r))

                                ≤ kf k∞ m3 (B(x0 , (1 + η)r) − m3 (B(x0 , r))
                                                                             

                                ≤ (1 + η)3 − 1 V3 r3 kf k∞ .
                                              
(18)


Collecting the estimates (14), (15) and (16)–(18), it follows that


                                                      5
                              kf kH −1 > c∗ (η) r 2 kf k∞ (λδ + δ − (1 + η)3 ).


Since δ > 1+λ1
                is postulated, the equation (1 + η)3 = δ(1+λ)+1
                                                           2    has a unique solution η = η(λ, δ);
this choice of η yields


                                                                    5
(19)                                    kf kH −1 > c∗ (λ, δ) r 2 kf k∞


with c∗ (λ, δ) = c∗ (η) δ(1+λ)−1
                            2
                                                               1
                                 (which is positive since δ > 1+λ ). This produces a contradiction.
                                                                                                            


The next theorem is a simple consequence of the above lemma and a careful choice of parameters
throughout the paper; it is designated a theorem because of its significance.

Theorem 26. Let u be a Leray solution (a global-in-time        weak solution satisfying the global energy in-
                                             ∗     ∞   for some T ∗ > 0. Then for any τ in (0, T ∗ ) for which
                                                     
equality), and assume that ω is in C (0, T ), L
           ∗
the scale r defined below is less or equal to one, the super-level sets

                                                                                     
                                                                         1
                              Vτj,± =       x∈R   3
                                                      : ωj± (x, τ ) >      kω(τ )k∞
                                                                        2M

are 3D 34 -sparse around any spatial point x0 at scale

                                                                    1
                                            r∗ = c(ku0 k2 )              2
                                                               kω(τ )k∞
                                                                      5



where c(ku0 k2 ) is a constant depending only on the energy at time 0 (M is the parameter set preceding the
statement of Theorem 19; recall that 1 < M < 32 ).
20                         ZACHARY BRADSHAW, ASEEL FARHAT, AND ZORAN GRUJIĆ


Proof. Notice that our choice of parameters implies that

                                                         3      1
                                                           >      1 ,
                                                         4   1 + 2M

and Lemma 24 is applicable.

Since we are on the whole space, an efficient way to estimate kω(τ )kH −1 is by switching to the
Fourier space where one is required to estimate integrals of the form

                                                 Z
                                                            1                    2
                                        Ii,j =                    |∂d
                                                                    i uj (ξ, τ )| dξ.
                                                         1 + |ξ|2

This is plain since


                                     |ξi |2
                               Z
                      Ii,j ≤                |ubj (ξ, τ )|2 dξ ≤ ku(τ
                                                                 d)k2 = ku(τ )k2 ≤ ku0 k2
                                                                     2         2        2
                                   1 + |ξ|2

(by the energy inequality).

Consequently, in order to satisfy all the assumptions in the lemma, it suffices to postulate

                                                                        
                                                     ∗          1    3        5
                                    c ku0 k2 ≤ c                  1 ,4       r 2 kω(τ )k∞ ,
                                                             1 + 2M

which forces the choice of the scale of sparseness r∗ in the theorem.
                                                                                                         


Remark 27. For our purposes, the restriction r∗ ≤ 1 in the theorem is irrelevant since we are only
interested in temporal points τ leading to a possible blow-up time. It is also more of a feature than
a bug since the formation of small scales is a characteristic of the fully nonlinear regime.


Remark 28. Some effort has been made to assure that both the cut-off levels for the super-level
                                                                                            1
sets and the ratios of sparseness in Theorem 19 and Theorem 26 are identical, λ = 2M           and δ = 34 .
Moreover, since the constants featured in either of the two scales of sparseness are either absolute
(after our choice of parameters was made) constants or the constant depending only on the initial
energy of the solution, the tolerance parameter c0 depends only      on the initial energy. Shortly, the
                                                1 3
regularity condition is given in the class Z 1 2M , 4 ; c0 (ku0 k2 ) , and the a priori bound in the class
                                             2
      1 3
                          
Z 2 2M  , 4 ; c0 (ku0 k2 ) .
     5
       AN ALGEBRAIC REDUCTION OF THE ‘SCALING GAP’ IN THE NAVIER-STOKES REGULARITY PROBLEM               21


                                             5. E PILOGUE

The authors’ goal was to present a mathematical framework–the scale of classes Zα –in which one
could break the archetypal 3D NS scaling barrier in the context of a blow-up-type argument. More
precisely–in this ambiance–we showed that the a priori bound can be shifted by an algebraic factor,
from Z 1 , which corresponds to the classical energy-level a priori bounds, to Z 2 ; recall that the
        3                                                                              5
regularity class in this setting is Z 1 , which corresponds to the classical regularity criteria, and can
                                      2
be viewed as a statement that the radius of spatial analyticity is a bona fide diffusion scale.

Parallel to the continued mathematical efforts, there is an effort directed at gaining some insight
into a ‘typical value’ of α by performing fully resolved computational simulations of turbulent
flows, as well as harvesting data from the Johns Hopkins Turbulence Databases (JHTDB), and
trying to identify the scaling properties of the scale of sparseness of the super-level sets of the
                                                                                                     1
                                                                                                    ν2
positive and negative parts of the vorticity components with respect to the diffusion scale              1   .
                                                                                                      2
                                                                                                   kωk∞
This has been a joint project with the complexity group of J. Mathiesen at the Niels Bohr Institute
(NBI) in Copenhagen, and in particular, with M. Mizstal, and the ScienceAtHome group at Aarhus
University led by J. Sherson; J. Rafner, of both the NBI and Aarhus is the project coordinator.

The simulations performed and the databases utilized cover both decaying turbulence (e.g., initial-
ized with the Kida vortex or with the frequency-localized noise) and forced isotropic turbulence;
in all simulations/databases, the spatial domain is a periodic box.

The data have been collected and analyzed in three different regimes: deeply in the inertial range,
deeply in the dissipation range, and in the regime of the most interest in the studies of possible
singularity formation in the 3D NSE, the regime of transition between the two.

The results will be detailed in a separate publication. Here, we would like to report that there are
indications of a statistically significant dependence between the two scales (the geometric scale of
sparseness and the analytic diffusion scale) in all three regimes; however, the transitional regime
has been the one signified by the strong evidence of a power law dependence with the range of
exponents implying that the solution in view stabilizes in a class Zα , for some α > 12 , indicating
no obstruction to furthering the rigorous Zα -theory presented here. Figure 2. below provides an
example of this phenomenon.
22                       ZACHARY BRADSHAW, ASEEL FARHAT, AND ZORAN GRUJIĆ




     F IGURE 2. Log-log plot of the scale of 3D sparseness (of the vorticity components) ri =
                                                 1
                                                ν2
     ri (ti ) vs. the diffusion scale di =           1   from a simulation initialized with the Kida vortex
                                                     2
                                             kω(ti )k∞
     ([Ki]) initial condition at the Reynolds number of approximately 104 . Originating the flow
     at the Kida vortex initial condition causes kω(t)k∞ to increase sharply before reaching the
     maximum and slumping, i.e., it produces a burst of kω(t)k∞ which is as close to ‘modeling
     a singularity’ in the 3D NS flows as feasible. In the plot, the time runs from right to left;
     (approximately) the first third of the time-slices are sourced from the initial time-interval in
     which the flow still has ‘too much memory’ of the initial condition, and the last two thirds
     of the time slices are sourced from the time-interval leading to the peak. As illustrated in
     the plot–in the time-interval leading to the peak–a power-type relation of the form r ≈ dα
     settles in; after proper rescaling, it is revealed that the slope of the line is approximately
                               6
     equal to 56 , i.e., r ≈ d 5 . This implies that the solution in view (leading to the peak) is
     approximately in Z 53 . Recall that the energy-level bound is Z 31 , our a priori bound is Z 25 ,
     and what is needed for our no blow-up criterion is at least Z 21 . Hence, the plot indicates
     that further improvements of the Zα a priori bounds–even past the critical class Z 12 –might
     indeed be possible (courtesy of M. Mizstal, NBI and J. Rafner, NBI and Aarhus).
         AN ALGEBRAIC REDUCTION OF THE ‘SCALING GAP’ IN THE NAVIER-STOKES REGULARITY PROBLEM                               23


                                                  Acknowledgments

The work of A.F. is supported in part by the National Science Foundation grant DMS-1418911. The
work of Z.G. is supported in part by the National Science Foundation grant DMS - 1515805 and the
Lundbeck Foundation grant R217-2016-446 (a collaborative grant with the NBI and Aarhus). Z.G.
thanks the Program in Applied and Computational Mathematics at Princeton for their hospitality
in Spring 2017 when the paper was finalized. The authors thank the referee for the constructive
comments.



                                                      R EFERENCES
[Ahl]         L. Ahlfors, Conformal Invariants: Topics in Geometric Function Theory. Providence, RI: AMS Chelsea,
              2010.
[BKM84]       J.T. Beale, T. Kato, and A. Majda, Remarks on the breakdown of smooth solutions for the 3D Euler equations,
              Comm. Math. Phys. 94, 61 (1984).
[BrGr13-2]    Z. Bradshaw and Z. Grujić, A spatially localized L log L estimate on the vorticity in the 3D NSE, Indiana
              Univ. Math. J. 64, 433 (2015).
[BGK15]       Z. Bradshaw, Z. Grujić, and I. Kukavica, Local analyticity radii of solutions to the 3D Navier-Stokes equations
              with locally analytic forcing, J. Differential Equations 259, 3955 (2015).
[Br]          A. Bressan, A lemma and a conjecture on the cost of rearrangements, Rend. Sem. Mat. Univ. Padova 110, 97
              (2003).
[Co90]        P. Constantin Navier-Stokes equations and area of interfaces, Comm. Math. Phys. 129, 241 (1990).
[Co94]        P. Constantin, Geometric statistics in turbulence, SIAM Rev. 36, 73 (1994).
[CoFe93]      P. Constantin and C. Fefferman, Direction of vorticity and the problem of global regularity for the Navier-
              Stokes equations, Indiana Univ. Math. J. 42, 775 (1993).
[daVeigaBe02] H. Beirao da Veiga and L.C. Berselli, On the regularizing effect of the vorticity direction in incompressible
              viscous flows, Diff. Int. Eqs. 15, 345 (2002)
[ESS03]       L. Escauriaza, G. Seregin, and V. Shverak, L3,∞ -solutions of Navier-Stokes equations and backward unique-
              ness, Uspekhi Mat. Nauk. 58, 3 (2003).
                                                                     −1
[FGL]         A. Farhat, Z. Grujić, and K. Leitmeyer, The space B∞,∞     , volumetric sparseness, and 3D NSE, J. Math. Fluid
              Mech. 19, 515 (2017).
[FT]          C. Foias and R. Temam, Gevrey class regularity for the solutions of the Navier-Stokes equations, J. Funct.
              Anal. 87, 359 (1989).
[GKP]         I. Gallagher, G. Koch, and F. Planchon, Blow-up of critical Besov norms at a potential Navier-Stokes singu-
              larity, Comm. Math. Phys. 343, 1 (2016).
[GiMi]        Y. Giga and T. Miyakawa, Navier-Stokes flow in R3 with measures as initial vorticity and Morrey spaces,
              Commun. in Partial Diff. Equations 14, 577 (1989).
[GIM]         Y. Giga, K. Inui, and S. Matsui, On the Cauchy problem for the Navier-Stokes equations with nondecaying
              initial data, Hokkaido University Preprint Series in Mathematics (1998).
[GrKu98]      Z. Grujić and I. Kukavica, Space analyticity for the Navier-Stokes and related equations with initial data in
              Lp , J. Funct. Anal. 152, 447 (1998).
[Gr09]        Z. Grujić, Localization and geometric depletion of vortex-stretching in the 3D NSE, Comm. Math. Phys. 290,
              861 (2009).
[GrGu10-1]    Z. Grujić and R. Guberović, Localization of analytic regularity criteria on the vorticity and balance between
              the vorticity magnitude and coherence of the vorticity direction in the 3D NSE, Comm. Math. Phys. 298, 407
              (2010).
[Gr13]        Z. Grujić, A geometric measure-type regularity criterion for solutions to the 3D Navier-Stokes equations, Non-
              linearity 26, 289 (2013).
[Gu]          R. Guberović, Smoothness of Koch-Tataru solutions to the Navier-Stokes equations revisited, Discrete Contin.
              Dyn. Syst. 27, 231 (2010).
[IKX]         G. Iyer, A. Kiselev, and X. Xu, Lower bound on the mix norm of passive scalars advected by incompressible
              enstrophy-constrained flows, Nonlinearity 27, 973 (2014).
[Ki]          S. Kida, Three-dimensional periodic flows with high symmetry, J. Phys. Soc. Jpn. 54, 2132 (1985).
24                          ZACHARY BRADSHAW, ASEEL FARHAT, AND ZORAN GRUJIĆ


[Ku2]         I. Kukavica, On local uniqueness of weak solutions of the Navier-Stokes system with bounded initial data, J.
              Differential Equations 194, 39 (2003).
[Leray1]      J. Leray, Etude de diverses équations intégrales nonlinéaires et de quelques problèmes que pose l’hydrodynamique,
              J. Math. Pures Appl. 12, 1 (1933).
[Leray2]      J. Leray, Essai sur les mouvements plans d’un liquide visqueux que limitent de parois, J. Math. Pures Appl. 13,
              331 (1934).
[Leray3]      J. Leray, Sur le mouvement d’un liquide visqueux emplissant l’espace, Acta Math. 63, 193 (1934).
[LR]          P. G. Lemarie-Rieusset, Recent developments in the Navier-Stokes problem. Chapman and Hall/CRC,
              2002.
[Mey]         Y. Meyer, Oscillating Patterns in Some Nonlinear Evolution Equations, Lecture notes in mathematics 1871,
              C. I. M. E. Foundation Subseries: Mathematical Foundation of Turbulent Viscous Flows, Springer 2003.
[Phuc]        N. C. Phuc, The Navier-Stokes equations in nonendpoint borderline Lorentz spaces, J. Math. Fluid Mech. 17,
              4 (2015).
[Ran]         T. Ransford, Potential Theory in the Complex Plane. Cambridge University Press, 1995.
[SchSree]     J. Schumacher, J. Scheel, D. Krasnov, D. Donzis, V. Yakhot, and K. R. Sreenivasan, Small-scale universality
              in fluid turbulence, PNAS 111, 10961 (2014).
[Sol]         A. Y. Solynin, Ordering of sets, hyperbolic metrics, and harmonic measure, J. Math. Sci. 95, 2256 (1999).
[St]          E.M. Stein, Harmonic Analysis: Real-Variable Methods, Orthogonality, and Oscillatory Integrals,
              Princeton University Press, 1993.
[Tay37]       G. I. Taylor, Production and dissipation of vorticity in a turbulent fluid, Proc. Roy. Soc., A164, 15 (1937).


D EPARTMENT OF M ATHEMATICS , U NIVERSITY OF A RKANSAS
E-mail address: zb002@uark.edu

D EPARTMENT OF M ATHEMATICS , F LORIDA S TATE U NIVERSITY
E-mail address: aseelfarhat842@gmail.com

D EPARTMENT OF M ATHEMATICS , U NIVERSITY OF V IRGINIA
E-mail address: zg7c@virginia.edu
